issues.
Okay. Uh thank you everyone. We'll call
this meeting to order. This is a town of
Andover Board of Finance meeting for
Wednesday, September 24th. Uh we'll go
ahead and recite the pledge of
allegiance. I pledge allegiance to the
flag
of America to theublic
indivisible indivisibley
and justice for all.
>> Okay. Thank you.
Uh we'll move in our agenda. First item
is public speak. I see Haley. Uh do you
have anything you want to uh bring
before the board?
>> Nothing at this time, but thank you.
>> Okay. Thank you. And uh Tess, anything
from you for the board?
>> I'm all set. Thank you, sir.
>> Okay. And I think Nick is just a
community access channel. Is that right?
>> Correct. Okay.
feel free to communicate if you would
like. So, okay.
Hey, Kim.
>> Hey, how are you Mark?
>> Good.
>> Okay, we'll move on to agenda item
three, which is changes or additions to
the agenda. Does anybody have any
proposed changes or additions to the
agenda?
>> Okay, hearing none, we'll move on to it.
>> Wait a minute. Sorry, Mark. I was
looking down the Should we add
um
schedule try board.
Well, you had sent out an email tonight.
Can that be an open discussion telling
us?
>> Yeah, we can talk about those topics in
open discussion.
>> Yeah, sounds great. Thank you. That's
all.
>> Okay, we'll go on to town administrators
report. Uh Eric, floor is yours.
>> Okay, so you all saw the
uh packet that I submitted. I just
resubmitted the one I gave to the board
of selectman. Um, so prior to the town
uh you having the tri board meeting,
what I would like to do and get in your
hands before that meeting is update the
building and grounds report which
essentially functions as the five-year
capital plan uh for buildings and
grounds. Um, and then also share with
you the project summary of where we are
and all the active and proposed projects
as well as go over the grant master list
of everything we have open uh right now.
Um, I can go over some of that
information now. I don't know how much
time you want to devote to the town
administrator's report. Um, or I can
just take questions. It's whatever the
board's pleasure if you have specific
questions.
>> I always like the format when you go
through it, Eric. It's nice.
>> Okay.
>> I don't know about the rest of the
board.
>> The highlights. Yeah, I went through it,
but Yeah.
>> Sure. Okay. So, uh the biggest ticket
item right now is the bridge at Bunker
Hill. Um so, the really good news is we
are back on track with that project. If
any of you looked, the main uh deck
beams are in. They should be pouring the
deck slab, which is the thing that sits
on top of that. Uh by next week, um
there's about five sequential concrete
pores that each have a you have to pour,
then you have to strip the forms, and
you have to reform the next one, and you
have to pour the next one. So, there's
quite a bit of work to do, but the great
news is that almost everything right now
is in the hands of the contractor
himself and his crews, not uh he's not
beholden to beam manufacturers or micro
pile installers or anything else. Um so,
that is good. um the town and the state
uh DOT put up kind of a uniform front in
rejecting the contractor's original
proposal which was to repair the
defective beams that were manufactured.
Um, you know, we told them in no
uncertain terms we weren't going to
accept them and the state DOT said in
all likelihood they would uh degrade the
load carrying capacity of the bridge if
we did accept them. So we said thank you
very much. No intention of doing that.
Um they've put a lot of pressure on us.
Um but ultimately I don't think we have
any real liability with that. um they're
obligated to meet the DOT specs on their
product and they didn't. So, we have
every right to insist that it gets
repaired. Um so, that's back and forth.
We had another issue with a one set of
testing for one set of the micro piles
in the bridge. And for those of you who
don't know, the micro piles are what
what secures the bridge abutman, which
is the thing the main carrying beam sit
on down to uh you know bedrock
essentially. And what they do is they
drill a series of holes. Each hole is
about 6 in in diameter. And they drill
them down to the bedrock and then about
6 in into the bedrock. They put a very
heavy steel casing uh all the way down
to the bedrock. They put a really
massive piece of rebar, a piece of rebar
that's like 2 and 1/2 in uh in diameter
down in and then they fill it with
grout. One of the grout uh strength test
reports came back low. Um but you know
in speaking with the engineer um they
reran the calculations even even
assuming that the grout all of the grout
was at that kind of very low level and
it still passes a structural test. Um
which means there's no structural issues
with the bridge. Um it's one of those
items that's massively overbuilt anyway.
Um, so it shouldn't affect any the
longevity uh of the bridge. So we're
back on track with that. With a little
luck, we will be open fully um sometime
in December with it paved and ready to
go. So really happy about that. Um, the
second thing is we've gotten to the
point where we had a full-blown bid
package for the improvements at the
Veterans Memorial Field. Um, so the
committee had increased their wants a
little bit over what we were originally
uh asking for and planning because we
secured an additional legislative grant
uh you know from the Connecticut State
Legislature through uh our senator MD
Robin. So that allowed us to spend more
money on the project than we were
initially. Um, so we uh are planning on
using what's called the easy IQC
program. And what that is is a pre-bid
arrangement
that uh it's something that goes to bid
every year competitively through the
capital regional council of governments
and then other crogs throughout the
state piggyback on the capital region's
bids. Um, and basically what it is is
it's a line by line agreement from the
contractor for what they charge for each
operation involved in heavy
construction. Um, so what it does is it
allows you to get something that's been
competitively bid, but during the
process of working through the project,
the only thing you really have to come
to terms with and agree on are what the
quantities of each unit step is. So from
an administrative standpoint, it makes a
lot of sense. Um, generally the state
has been very happy uh with towns using
that program because that really speeds
up their ability to review the programs
and it seems to be pretty cost-effective
for the towns. Um, some of you may
recall when we did the community
connectivity grant program, which was
roughly a $300,000
series of projects, that was an easy
IQC. Um, and that came in reasonably
well under budget. Um, so I think all in
all, it's a win for the town. Um the
board of selectman authorized me to uh
sign a contract for that program for the
work um and authorized the work pending
a final response back from the
department of economic and community
development that uh because because we
added money from a second fund that is
also administered through DEC I have to
submit a revised budget. So presuming
they authorize the revised budget, I
think sometime by the middle of October,
we should be signing that contract and
getting the work started. Um, we are
doing a portion of the work with public
works because there are some things in
the original bid that I think we can do
far more economically
than uh than the contractor just because
we have a local public works and we have
all the equipment to do those particular
tasks. So that's kind of how we're uh
tackling that. That is the kind of next
big um you know project going other than
the branch. I think I mentioned this to
the board before but we are moving up
the uh time frame for replacing the
Longhill Bridge. Um, if you remember
that bridge is a federal local bridge
program uh grant um with a grant from
the state for something called design
managed by state and then additionally
it has some additional funds from the
investments and jobs act. So that is a
fully funded bridge. The reason it got
moved up one year is the state is really
worried about the federal government
pulling the
um and potentially fed local bridge
funds from the program because they seem
to be doing that uh on a number of
things. So they want to get these
projects that there aren't major hurdles
to doing. They've pushed them up in
schedule everything they could. And
because that project doesn't require
taking and they already have preliminary
Army Corps of Engineer approval, that's
one that they can push forward. So
that's what's happening. The other big
concern,
>> just a quick question, what is the
target date for that? If you're saying
hopefully the Bunker Hill would be done
with, you know, fingers crossed, maybe
by December, what what is the target
date for I don't have it in front of me.
When would the target date to possibly
start Long Hill?
>> Uh, we're going to be doing tree
trimming November of this year and
hopefully utility relocation November
and December of this year with a firm
date of April 1 for the start of
construction. So, Longill Bridge should
be closed April 1 um for a minimum of
eight months.
>> Thank you.
>> Yep. Will we make sure that I know that
they don't intersect and the traffic
doesn't, but will we make sure one
project is done just to not have two
bridges that might be affected? Well,
you said April 1st. Yeah, there's a
there's a gap there. You're doing
preliminary work before.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Well, we'll we're really
only doing preliminary work to get
around the fact that the federal
government uh added a particular bat
species to the threatened list.
Um, and if we cut trees as part of the
grant and as part of the federal fund,
once the federal project starts, if we
haven't cut trees by then, we have a
very narrow window uh in the middle of
April and it will delay the project. So,
we're just doing this to get around a
particular federal rule um
which will be costneutral to the town.
Um, we do have agreement finally uh
after two and a half years of arguing
with them uh with the Department of
Transportation to put in a temporary
light at Hendy Road for the period of
construction. So, that was obviously a
big resident concern that traffic was
going to get really backed up when you
pushed both of those roads and everybody
from the north end of town all down
Hendy Road. Um, so that was a big
relief. That was a long drawn out uh
argument with the state. Um,
>> I would assume, Eric, to just turn off
the light at Long Hill, right? They're
not going to stop traffic anymore there.
So, just turn that light off, I would
assume.
>> Well, remember you still have public
works, you still have library, you still
have
>> Oh, that's true. Huh.
>> And you still have the food bank,
>> church. Yep.
>> Stupid question. I'm sorry.
>> Yeah. I think that light will need to
remain, but it probably won't turn very
often. Um, not nearly as often as it
does now.
>> Yeah, true.
>> Thank you for getting that done, Eric. I
appreciate that. Getting that extra
light.
>> Me, too. I mean, that's my commute every
day, too. I've got a
>> few of us up that end of the Yeah,
definitely.
>> Absolutely. Absolutely. So,
>> it's already a slow, so it's going to
get even slower.
>> Yep.
>> Thank you. Yep. Moving on. Sorry.
>> No problem. Um I think tomorrow we're
going to sign the final employment uh
letter with the new maintainer too for
public works. Um that I think should
work out pretty well for the department.
Um the only issue is we are hiring
somebody who has not completed his CDL.
um the town will pay him the cost for
the CDL, but he's agreed to reimburse
the town if he leaves town employment in
less than two years. So, I think that's
kind of fair all the way around. Um we
had an awful lot of applications.
Um but we had very few good candidates.
Um really two. Um out of a pool of about
60 um there were two that we would have
considered hiring. But, you know, that's
so positive for the town, Eric, because
I know in the past that you've said
applications that come in, I mean, this
is something I'm always, you know,
people just aren't looking to work in
Andover. Um, again, I know you said they
weren't qualified, but that's we are
very competitive in our wages compared
to other towns. So, it just proves that
people are coming towards Andover. So,
great.
>> I'm not sure I would agree with that
statement, but uh, everybody has an
opinion. No, I mean that is my opinion
on research, but I I know we don't
always agree. No problem. But that's
positive. 60 applicants. Wow.
>> Okay. Thank you.
>> Yeah. But when you take out the bakers
and the food service workers and the
long haul truckers who can't run um we
interviewed five. Three of those five we
rejected outright. Um
>> I got to get you to be positive. We got
to see some You had five qualified
applicants. Yes.
But anyway, thank you.
>> We had two qualified applicants, one of
which agreed to take it.
>> Um, and you only need one, so I am
positive about that.
>> Yeah.
>> Um, so that's kind of it for the main
um administrator's report. Um, I just
kind of wanted to go over
>> follow up after.
>> Oh, shoot. Go for it.
>> Well, I don't know. And I again when I
was shaking my head earlier I always
like to hear your report. I thought you
were going to go in deep on something
else that you had mentioned like our
whole process of the budget. So um in
part of your administrator's report and
I see the two ladies are here today. I
don't intend to get into any kind of
personnel, you know, situation, but I
know that I listened to the board of
selectmen meeting and they touched on,
you know, there was a topic there and
it's in your report that, you know, Tess
has rejoined the community center as a
director. I, you know, they didn't
really, they don't talk about too much.
And then I know Haley is here, who I've
never met yet, but they're both here
tonight. And then I know there was
topics about, you know, retaining both
employees in a plan. I don't know how
much the town is allowed to know as far
as, you know, with closed meetings
because you had it on an agenda and it's
on our agenda tonight and it obviously
is a financial piece. I'm not, you know,
how the process wasn't really spoken
about. So obviously she I'm only going
on the financial piece. So, there was a
person that was out of office for a
while. Now, she's back in office, you
know, um, which I'm sure she's happy
about. Again, I don't know the backends
of anything. And then we have a person
who was temporarily filling a position.
>> So, are you planning to talk to us about
that, about the financial impact of
that? Because I know it came up on the
board of selectmen or is that another
thing down the road? I just thought that
they were both here, so I didn't not
that they need to speak, but I only like
to say things in front of people, so I
want them to know that I heard it at the
board of selectmen, but it didn't go
into too many details.
>> Sure. Ultimately, the board of
selectman's going to have to make a
decision
>> whether they want to retain both people
>> and for uh what number of hours. And
that's ultimately a board of selectmen
decision.
>> Of course. Yeah.
>> Um
that will certainly have financial
implications. And at the current
staffing level, we would definitely be
quite a bit over budget. There's no
question about that.
>> And in the past, not talking
particulars, I knew that building was
funded with a full-time person and a
part-time hourly person. And again, I'm
not trying to I'm just asking the
question as a town resident, too. Like
if I've tuned into a meeting and it was
on an agenda item, you know, there
hasn't been too much shared with the
town except for,
you know, a couple things. So I mean
yeah
>> the the board made their decision after
discussion in that executive session and
I'm not
>> right
>> you know I don't have the authority to
to say what was what their rationale was
or or what logic uh they used in
executive session that is that is a
board decision that's that's not an Eric
decision
>> and I want to tell people that might see
this meeting or listen to this meeting I
am in no you know I'm neutral
I'm happy with whatever decisions are
made. I'm sure there was a process, but
I think they deserve to to know just a
little bit of
clearly. So, thank you. I just saw the
two ladies here. I would never speak
behind their back. I want them to hear
that I'm, you know, hopefully it'll work
out for the best for the town and, you
know, people can be positive moving
forward. But whatever happened, it will
be a result of an additional funding to
the town because of whatever happened.
So that's it. Thanks. If that's all you
can share with us, it was just on your
report. It was an agenda item that the
board of selectmen did not discuss too
much at the thing. So, thank you.
>> Correct.
>> Okay.
Um, so in terms of current grants that
we have active, we have a grant for the
senior transportation hub. That was
originally a $275,000
grant and uh the town agreed at town
meeting to match that with $75,000.
Um we've got through most of the
background
um administrative stuff which is
basically getting through Shipo uh the
state historic preservation society. We
made a decision to use the easy IQC
program for that also after the board of
selectmen had asked to redesign that to
include
full second floor storage because as
many of you know one of the things we
really lack as a town is dry storage.
Um, and there's lots of boards and
commissions that, you know,
need space to store stuff from the wreck
commission,
um, to the library who has a storage
facility at Andover Self Storage, um, to
the CIR team, um, you know, with with,
uh, emergency operations supplies, all
of that stuff. So, we
we used the EZIQC program. Um, we got an
initial bid um or a or initial contract
amount and document. Um, and before we
were going to commit anywhere near the
kinds of funds to do that, I wanted to
see a final structural design number
one, so we knew what kind of loading the
second floor could actually accommodate.
And the second thing is, you know, I
want a visual design because this is
going in a neighborhood on Center Street
and I want it to make the neighborhood
look better, not worse. So, uh, we
signed a basically $12,000 design
contract with them, which will come off
the cost of the construction because
they would have had to done the design
anyway. Um,
and so once we get that back, we'll
reassess what the the total cost of the
project is, but it is likely to be more
than uh the 275 plus 7, you know,
75,000.
Um, there's no question it's going to be
probably closer to a half a million once
we deal with the speestatement and demo
of the existing structure. um probably
475,000 is a more realistic plus a
contingency. So, if we're going to do
that um without going back to the town
money, we the town for more money, which
I don't think anybody really wants to
do, then we would probably be looking at
spending low funds, which we do have
available. Um and and that will be a
discussion for the board of selectmen,
possibly the board of finance. um that's
between the boards how they wanna
whether they want to go back to town
meeting to discuss it or how they want
to proceed with that. So that's one
project. I I would really like to get
that to construction in the spring. Um
that grant's now three years old.
Unfortunately, construction costs have
gone up a lot in three years. Um but I
think that's still a very worthwhile
program for the town to do. Um, and if
we do it correctly, we are still talking
about spending, you know, $75,000
worth of town money. Um, you know, and
roughly $400,000 worth of state money to
do it. So, it's still a pretty good
investment on the towns. Um, I talked a
little bit before about the uh 2023
steep grant for recreational
improvements. That was a half million
dollar grant that we got a $150,000
town match at town meeting. Um, and
subsequently
we have received a legislative
appropriation
for this fiscal year for $250,000
for uh additional recreational
improvements. So that allows us to spend
$750,000
of state money on that and still keep
the the $150,000
town match which will be partially
services in kind and partially actually
cash. Probably we're going to end up
spending around $135,000
and the rest will be labor by public
works. Uh we also received a $10,000
Hartford Foundation for Public Giving to
help out with the costs of that. So
we're anticipating it being somewhere
around a $910,000
project. Um and of that $910,000,
$150,000
is Andover taxpayer dollars. So again,
it's an expensive project. um they had
big goals for it, but it's mostly state
funded, so that's good. Um the two large
bridges um over the Hop River, those
both both are ultimately 100% funded by
state and federal dollars. Those are not
actually taking any taxpayer dollars to
do, which is huge because those are all,
you know, between four and $5 million
projects. So, it's nice not to have to
pay even a portion of those. Um, we had
talked before
about the issues with the bridge and the
fact that we have to pay the contractor
and then get wait to get reimbursed by
the state of Connecticut. Um, we are
currently out
about $900,000
awaiting reimbursement for the state.
So, we had about a million dollars
combined between the Bunker Hill Bridge
fund and the bridge and culvert fund.
So, we've tapped both of those and, you
know, we've already uh requested
reimbursement from the state. we've
already spent and got reimbursed about,
you know, close to a million dollars so
far. Um, it's just that the time when
they delivered the bridge, the main
carrying beams, that's a super
expensive. So, we knew this was going to
be the crunch month. Um, and we did get
it under a million dollars, so we didn't
have to tap uh the unencumbered fund
balance. So, I think overall we're
pretty good on that project, but that's
the fact that we're that far out of
pocket does make me uh a little nervous.
Um,
we
talked about both bridges.
Uh, we do have a lot, which is local
transportation capital improvement
planning grant of around $2.9 million.
that's hanging out there. Um,
so as many of you would remember, uh,
two years ago, we asked for and got a
legislative study grant of $100,000
to, uh, figure out the best way to
connect the municipal campus to the rail
trail and ultimately the library and
recreational fields. Um, so we got a
$100,000 grant. We used that for
preliminary data and to apply for two
other grants um both of which we got
amazingly enough. And then we used the
access money for most of the design for
the multi-use pathway that runs down uh
school road and then Route 360 and Cider
Mill. Um the problem is we're probably
around $100,000 short in finishing off
that grant. Um and the lot set funding
that we have pays for 100% of the cost
of the actual construction
and the easements, you know, in any
rightaway acquisition and all the
physical costs of building. but it does
not pay for us to finish the study. So,
one of the things I'm going to be asking
out of the board of finance
and I should have a final design number
from that from the contractor or what it
will take to finish the design is the
money to finish the design so we can get
that uh and proceed forward into
construction which will probably be in a
year or two. Um, so that is coming up
>> question. So,
this might have gone over my head, but
so you're saying that we have enough
grant money to actually build the
project uh complete the the trail
project, but not enough money to finish
the mapping out of it or am I
>> Yeah, the design of the project.
>> So, yeah,
>> the way a lot of state grants work, they
come in one of two flavors. either they
will pay for a set percentage of the
total project cost or they will agree to
pick up the design cost depending on the
grant or they'll agree to pick up the
construction costs. The lot program um
pays for the complete construction cost
of the project. That's why it's such a
soughtafter grant to get
>> um because a it's you know you can get a
lot of money out of them for pretty
significant projects and b um you know
it pays it does not require a town
match. The problem with those grants is
the town is on the hook for all the
design and engineering costs upfront.
Um, and which is why I went after the
study grant initially because I wanted
to fund as much of the design costs as I
could because I knew I was going to try
to use lots of funding um for the actual
construction.
And then if the town lect
in in the the second part of that is we
also then applied for the DEP wreck
trails funding to do a design that goes
through the woods from the town hall
along the old Percy Cook trail hiking
trail uh to the rail trail in part
because it'll make a nice cool couple
mile loop trail. Um, and it's probably
uh,
you know, it's a lot more scenic than
just riding down Route 316. So, one, the
one down 316 is better for ADA
accessibility.
The other one is, you know, more natural
and more scenic. Um, so we went
different tracks with those and and the
goal really is to get enough money to
finish the design. So could because we
have construction funds through through
lots and then use the other grant um
which the which is will pay for the
design for the second trail and then go
back to lots and see if I can lots of
fund that because by the time because I
have a grant now to do the finished
design for that one. If I can supply
lots funding for construction then I
will have done the program. I will have
done that path without spending any town
dollars, which is always the objective.
>> Eric, quick question. Is there a
expiration date on that? I mean, I know
that's a big undertaking, that 316
project that you're talking about.
>> I Is there an expiration? I mean, the
town just has so many things going on
and only so many people to oversee them.
I mean, I know it's it's out there, but
can we delay it a little bit to not have
>> um I think if we work really hard, we
would be in construction on the actual
construction on that in four to five
years.
>> Oh,
>> this is not something we're going to be
doing next year. Um you know, that
100,000
>> that makes me feel better. I didn't
know. Right. you still have all the
pieces to put together and yeah I know
one of the drawbacks you know from going
to the meetings and and educating
ourselves on it did we get permission
from all the land owners it would affect
I mean I know that's part of your thing
right has that
>> so we talked to
>> landowner
>> um related to that project
>> because there about six of them I think
that would be affected or something
>> yeah there's not many addressed all
their concerns. Yeah.
>> In the initial document we got back from
DOT,
>> um DOT gave us an initial round of
comments on it. They pushed back against
a couple things. Um so we will have to
go back to the homeowners, but we're not
at a point yet, you know, we've got to
get farther along in the design stage.
>> Yeah. before we have enough uh final
pathway information to do it. Um the
great thing about fully funding
construction on this is it gives us the
ability that program you can build in
aesthetic elements to the design. So, I
think we can leave every single affected
property owner um aesthetically a lot
better off after the trail than they are
now. So, I think our goal really is to
work with them all one on-one to ensure
we, you know, we satisfy what they need
to get out of the project for them to
feel comfortable to let it go forward.
Um,
>> no, thank you. Those were my concerns. I
didn't, you know, having so many things.
You said four or five years out, you of
course you have to get all the
permissions. No, that makes sense. Thank
you.
>> Yep. And by the way, I've been working
on this particular project since 2015.
So, that's one of those things where if
you can pull it off in, you know, uh, 15
years, that would actually be pretty
good. Um, for a small town like us, it's
not something that comes quickly. Um, I
talked about the D recreck trails grant.
That's the other big one. In terms of
other things that we have funding
hanging out right now, um, we have a
grant in for a new handicapped
accessible van. Um, that was submitted
in the spring of 2025.
We should get notified sometime this
fall, uh, late fall, whether we got it
or not. I think it's unlikely that we're
going to get it on the first
application. Um, you know, there's just
too many people applying for it. That's
the kind of thing you apply for, you
know, two or three years before they
finally decide, uh, your turn is up. Um,
so I'm not anticipating that we get
that. Um, if we did, it would require a
20% match. Um, so that would have to go
to town meeting and we'd have to go to
town meeting to accept it, but you know,
we'd get a replacement for our van,
which is kind of falling apart. Um, you
know, so it's something we need to do at
some point. Anyway, um, the second thing
is we still have a request to the
federal government for money to complete
the community center and to add a backup
generator to the town hall. Um, again,
that got approved by the Senate
uh finance committee. Um, it's the
second year in a row they've approved
funding for us. Um, but last year they
didn't fund any federal appropriations.
Um, so even though, you know, it was a
project that the Senate was in agreement
with, um, they didn't fund it. So, we
submitted that through Senator Murphy's
uh, office. Um, as you know, since there
are starting to talk about a government
shutdown at the federal level, um, I
think the likelihood of them passing a
budget in October, you know, I would
anticipate a bunch of continuing
resolutions. And if you look at the
continuing resolution that failed, um,
but that they were pushing, it didn't
have any uh, legislative appropriations
in it. So, I think there's a reasonable
chance that uh we won't know one way or
the other till sometime in next March
whether that is funded. Um if that is
funded, that would be about $310,000,
which would leave us about $150,000
short of completing the project. we do
have that money um in the multi-use BIS
building fund that's already designated
for that. So, we could provide our match
pretty readily to get that project
moving. Um if we slow rolled it a little
bit um next July we will have another
$250,000
legislative appropriation from the uh
from the state which we could
potentially use for that too. So that
you know we'll if we get that we'll have
a couple different options to fund that.
If we don't get that, we're likely to
end up using the town money and adding
the state money to it and do as much of
that program as we can. Ideally,
probably the generator uh first because
that's one of our biggest uh needs right
now. Um and that's it from me on that
unless you have other questions related
to grants or buildings or or anything
else.
>> Next question. Is there are these grants
all listed on the town website
somewhere? Like because obviously I'm
not going to sit here and write all
these notes out. Is there someplace
where we can go and see like the list of
all the stuff that you were talking
about or is that in that big
>> I mean I will send you
>> a grants an updated grants master list
file. Um I'll send that to the board of
finance. I was planning on doing it
because
>> yeah I haven't updated in about six
months. But yeah, I will I will give you
that. So you have
>> Yeah, it's a lot and to sit here and
write the criminos painful. So thank
you.
>> Yeah. Yep. Not a problem.
Other questions for me related to that
or any other topic.
>> Eric, just a followup to Liz's question.
Sorry, Kim. If if we do that, um if you
send that to us, will it have the town
match listed on like a spreadsheet?
I was don't don't make work for
yourself. I just wondered if the
>> it is. Thank you because I mean I know a
lot of the things have passed and we'll
say there's 150 or smaller, you know, 20
and Thank you. That's good. Yeah, that's
a good thing.
>> Yep.
>> Question.
>> Jim, you had a question.
>> Um, no, just a couple of comments. First
of all, Eric, thank you. Sounds like you
have grants going on for the next 15
years.
Uh,
Oh wow. Um, and I I just wanted to like
comment with Liz there. I when I started
on the board of finance, one of the
things I had hoped to do is have a spot
on the town of Andover website where we
listed our grants, all departments
within the town. I thought that would be
great. And I've realized while I've sat
here and listened that that's probably
far too big of a project um to take on.
So I get it. But I I get what Liz is
saying too. It is it's it's a lot to try
to write it all down and etc etc. But
thank you very much for your update
tonight.
>> Yeah, I'll I'll give you so I I'll give
you in the next week essentially three
documents. One is the master grant list.
Um the second is the
uh updated
um for lack of a better term, it's the
CIP report on town buildings and
properties, which is essentially as
functioned as a five-year capital plan.
Um although to be honest, you know,
we've gotten so much done with the
town's buildings that the majority of
things we really needed to accomplish,
um a real significant fraction of them
are done. Um so what I'm going to do is
basically list out everything that still
hasn't been done. And what I tried to do
is I tried to uh assign two things to
each
recommendation and that is some kind of
code which says why we want to do it. Is
it because of energy efficiency,
comfort, longevity or is it related to
public safety? And then a priority. So
you can kind of look at where my
thoughts are, not only on what we need
to do, but what is the most important to
think about as we go into budgeting. But
the great news when you look at the
document is if you compare this to what
I gave to the board in say 2020,
we've knocked off a huge number of the
big projects that we have. Um, so the
good news is, you know, it's not that
big a list that we have to we have to
think about. So that's good. Um, you
know, I'm pretty happy with that. And
then, uh, that is pretty much it. The
master grants list and the CIP report
will get you most of the information.
And then I have a kind of a projects
list also which is all the projects
building projects that are underway or
recently completed. And with that I list
what the funding sources is for all
those so you can see where the money
flows into for these projects. Um,
right.
>> But yeah, there's a lot going on and
we've,
>> you know, we've tracked down somewhere
north of $14 million in grant funding in
the last six years, which for a small
town is is pretty awesome.
>> So,
>> thank you for your explanation.
>> Yep. Hey, any other questions for Eric
on his report?
>> Thanks again, Eric.
>> Yep. Thank you. It's helpful. There is a
lot of detail. So yeah, the summaries
will be appreciated. I know we've had
things like that before. Been a while.
Okay. So I think we can go on to uh old
business. The first one is the review of
the budget to actual. We're pretty early
in the year. I didn't see anything
unusual. Eric, is there anything we
should be looking at there? Any
concerns?
>> Uh sure. Um nothing that's
a showstopper
um at this point. Um,
so the one thing that will be an issue,
and it won't be an issue in this year's
budget, would it would be an issue in
next year's budget, is the board of
selectman did agree to increase the
hourly wage for the assistant town
clerk. Um, the reason that's not an
issue right now is because by the time
November, the earliest we would be
hiring a town clerk probably is January
1. Half the year is already done. Um, so
our total expenses for the town clerk's
uh, you know, office for this year are
going to be reasonably under. So we have
no budgetary issues there, but there
will be the effect of an increased
hourly wage for the next year's budget.
So I'm just letting
>> one follow. Thank you on that. Is that
because that's a unionized position. So
there was like anou that the board of
selectmen went through. I don't need
details just No, thanks.
>> No, that's in you know, you can get
thatou if you want. Um
>> Oh, yeah. I'm not You said that the
board of selectmen agreed to raise it
and I happen to know it's a union
position. So which are usually posted.
No, just clarification. Thanks.
>> Yep. Um if you look under 4214 which is
community center uh given this current
staffing levels, there is not enough
budgeted for both individuals
um for the community center
director and assistant. So, if the board
of selectmen does choose to keep both
employees in place, which I it sounds
like they're leaning on doing, then
we're going to need to find a a source
of funding um for that extra salary. So,
I'm just giving you a heads up on that.
Um the other thing that and so if you
went down to the public works uh we're
going to be definitely under on public
works salary this year because we will
have gone at least two months where we
were short two of the five employees.
Um so we're pretty close to a final
contract with a public works supervisor.
Um, we're not announcing who that is
yet. Um, because the board of selectmen
would have to agree to a contract for
that and then that individual has to uh
resign from where they're working now.
Um, we're also probably tomorrow we will
be onboarding a new public works
employee. So that's good. Um,
>> you know, again, we're
>> sorry,
>> I'll let you I don't want to interrupt
till you're no follow-up question. Does
Does the town when they have those those
individual contracts, is there a um
probation period written in?
>> Uh, the
for the person that's going to be in the
union, there's there's automatically a
sixmonth probationary period. there is
not for somebody who's a professional.
Um I did work with the
uh labor attorney to make sure that the
employment contract
for the person that will be running uh
public works.
there's more flexibility built into that
one um than necessarily we've had in the
past, you know, but it's it's touchy
because most people who are jumping from
a secure position to something new, you
know, they want an actual multi-year
contract before they're going to
consider it. So,
>> right,
>> I think we made a reasonable compromise.
>> Good. I just know that our town the
history we've had a lot of problems you
know where
it's been a situation. So I mean
obviously you learn as you go. That's
not my role here but it financially
impacts the town. You know when one
contract doesn't go through and then
there's multiple employees in the spot
or that's all. So I wondered if from the
outside looking if they've decided to
upgrade it just to protect the town a
little bit so that when these contracts
don't go or don't work or an employee
leaves or they come back you know that
it's just protecting the funding. That's
all the financial part. So thank you for
your answer to that.
>> Understood. Um the next thing that was
so as you remember we've been doing
brush piles basically every three years
at the transfer station. So for two
years there will be zero expense for the
line item and then it jumps up to a big
number. Um, we actually waited about
three and a half years this year and at
the same time we put a lot of the the
town
because they to save cost has been
switching away from distinctive tree
care and using a a another tree service,
but we end up doing more work to get rid
of the extra wood um, which they'd been
dumping at the transfer station. So, the
long and the short of it is, you know,
we had a much bigger pile than we
anticipated when it actually came time
to chip it. The cost was more than
$20,000.
Um, but we spent the extra out of the
tree budget. Um, because that's really
what it was. It was in part savings from
using a different tree contractor. Um,
so that's done. That's so we'll take
$20,000 from the brush pile and we'll
take the rest from the tree care uh
permanent fund. So I'm just kind of
letting you know that that's occurring.
Um we've also been short on senior
transportation drivers for a while. Um
we're very fortunate in that we've
gotten two new drivers in um you know
with
uh you know with their F endorsements.
So we we're basically back up to full
staff with senior transportation.
So we were definitely under budget on
what we were spending for senior
transportation but that was in part
because we weren't able to provide rides
to everybody who wanted one. So happily
we're back up to full staff uh for that.
Um it is early in the year. That's
really I have all everything I have in
terms of budget to actual unless you
have specific questions about line items
for me.
>> I don't have any questions but I'm just
curious. Do you feel like now you are
staffing the senior transportation
properly? Do you have enough?
Is that going okay?
>> Yes. Right now we have we have four
drivers. So we have enough capacity to
meet all the demand we have. We only
have four vehicles. So, you know, but it
allows us to mix and match and cover for
people. You know, we had some
significant periods this summer where,
you know, when you're down to two
drivers and one of them's on vacation,
you know, you can't cover a senior lunch
and add a medical trip or multiple
medical trips. So,
>> so we we ended up,
>> you know, having to refuse some requests
we'd rather not have done,
>> right? Especially
>> we're back to full staff. We're happy
there.
>> Good. Thank you.
>> Okay. Anything else for Eric before we
move on?
>> Next item is check register. I don't
know if anybody has any question on
that. It's basically look like standard
stuff. I don't see anything unusual. I
would have asked about
no questions there. There was another
item that said 5C donation request, but
there's no supporting documentation
there. I'm not sure what that's about,
Eric. Do you know?
>> Yeah. Uh so that was listening to your
last meeting you had wanted to continue
a discussion on how donations were
handled. Um I wasn't at that meeting but
that's it said that I wasn't either kind
of left on the schedule.
>> We had that whole discussion last
meeting about you know we had got the
town was getting a donation and it was a
question of
>> can the town accept that where does it
go? does it what account does it go you
know how do we handle that and it ended
up being a little more complicated I
think than anybody figured going in so I
thought we'd table it and continue the
discussion but I don't think we're
really prepared to do so tonight so
maybe we just leave it on there for the
next meeting
>> was at our meeting right and Cheryl
talked to it and explained to um oh gosh
I can't think of her name right now
>> Diane Diane Grener who was you know very
interested in it so she went through all
the steps So all of us were, you know,
educated on it that it is a lot. You
just can't. So it was nice that Cheryl
was there for that. But Cheryl was going
to follow up with a couple notes and
then talk to the auditor. Um I didn't
get any information. Um so she might
have reached out to the auditor to find
out if they can create this account or
whatever. And if it's
>> she was going to ask the auditor's
opinion, right? She was gonna ask the
auditor's opinion because
>> there's really no way to to set this up.
There's no easy way. And Cheryl tried to
explain the process and how it's not so
cut and dry
>> and
>> because you have to have it over,
>> right?
>> Yeah. And so with these little bitty
amounts, it's it's a lot for the uh
treasurer to manage all these little
bitty amounts. And Cheryl agreed to go
back to to see to get the opinion of the
auditor because she feels that the
auditor would not think it's a good idea
either. But she agreed to get their
opinion and obviously we haven't heard
back from her. So we we don't know the
answer to that. I think we just agreed
to keep it on the agenda in case so it's
not forgotten about.
>> Sure. I I would say in my annual
discussions with the auditor, uh Mike
brings up the number of little funds and
accounts the town has and bank accounts
relative to the size of the town. Um,
yeah. And and I also know that,
>> you know, small funds with small dollar
amounts,
>> I would bet there's a lot of little
funds we have that we spend more time
having Cheryl reconcile them and uh do
financial statements for them than we
make in the funds, you know, and and I
don't have a solution because I don't
want to discourage
you know, organizations from seeking
small grants. I mean, that's a wonderful
thing for the town, but on a lot of
these things, even the Norton funds, I
often wonder whether the town would be
smarter to just write a check, you know,
to the Norton Commission for 15 grand
every year out of the general fund and
then not have to deal with any of the
fund accounting for, you know, all the
little pockets of money they have. Not a
popular opinion, but you know, there's
there's a cost to these um that we have
to keep in mind.
>> That's basically what Cheryl said.
>> Exactly.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Mark, I suggest we just wait until
we get more info from Cheryl, but it was
enlightening, you know.
>> Yeah, it makes sense. Yeah, I remember
some of the discussion preliminary
stuff. So, good.
>> It was like $2,500. I think she wanted
to donate. Was that right?
>> Something like that. Yeah, it was
>> only $25 she wanted to donate and
>> I think she wrote a check to the town
for $1,000
and that's just the holder because what
she's done is she's donated the money to
the Hartford Foundation for public
giving
um and they invest it and the dividends
from that or the interest from that will
get transferred to the town on an annual
basis to be spent under her account. So
the town has to have its own account,
you know, for the Hartford Foundation to
transfer money into on an annual basis.
Um, so that's really where the even
though the town's not holding much of
the money, it's a bigger bequest, but
we're only getting the interest from
that request available to fund.
>> Okay. Well, let's leave it there then.
Agree makes sense. So
>> yeah.
>> Okay. Okay. So, if we move on to new
business 6A is the update on the fire
department squad truck purchase.
>> So, we finally got the paperwork uh
completed after a halfozen rounds with
the bank and making the first blackman
come in to sign paperwork on at least
four different occasions. Um, a little
embarrassing on my part, but the uh
vehicle has been paid for. The town has
made the first payment to Mnt Bank for
it. It's set up for essentially
automatic withdrawal from our general
fund to the bank to pay the annual
payments. Um the truck is in the fire
department. Um and we still need to
finalize the paperwork to uh you know
assume control over it, but that's
proceeded pretty well.
>> Good.
progress.
>> Slow progress, but progress.
>> Any questions for Eric on that?
>> Eric, you said it was in our firehouse.
You said,
>> "Yes, it is."
>> Wow. Okay.
>> Should have a tour.
>> At the steak dinner, you could have if
you looked outside in the middle was the
new squad vehicle.
>> I missed that this year.
Okay. So, we'll move on to item 6B. This
is to schedule the tri board planning
meeting. So, uh Liz had graciously
agreed to uh help organize
um some polling of the uh potential uh
or all the board members. Um Liz, did
you come to a clear consensus on when
that should be scheduled?
>> Um yeah, I didn't hear from everybody.
Um,
but the con the agreed date for the
people that did respond is October 15th,
which is Wednesday.
Um, Mark wasn't available on Thursday,
which is actually after the 15th anyway.
So, that's not a preferred date. and the
somebody on the board of ed could not do
Monday, but everybody that responded
responded yes to the 15th. So, my
recommendation is that we have it on
October 15th at 7 o'clock and I'm happy
to send an email out to all the boards
to let them know that if if you'd like
me to do that.
>> Well, let's make a motion and schedule
it then, I say.
All right.
>> Can I just ask question
in person or virtual? Number one. And
where do you want to hold it?
>> I think an in-person meeting would be
nice only just to get everybody together
in a room,
but I don't know how other people feel
about I know it's not as convenient.
Mark, once we schedule it, are we going
to open it for discussion for
particulars of it? Is that what we're
gonna do?
>> We certainly can, but we don't need to.
I think we can
>> those
>> I think we we can just agree kind of on
what the agenda is. We can set the
agenda outside of the scheduling. Um,
you know, it's pretty straightforward.
If you read the
if you read the charter language, um,
it's straightforward, but it's also it's
not uh it's fairly open. It just says to
set the goals and objectives. uh for the
meeting. Um in fact, I had it opened.
Let me see if I can get that up real
quick again.
>> The goals and objectives of the budget
year, something like that, right?
>> Um scroll, scroll, scroll. I found it
here.
>> Duties in the budget. Uh no later than
October 15th, the board of finance shall
confer with the board of selectment and
the board of education to discuss the
goals and objectives for the upcoming
budget. Board of Finance may suggest a
target for expenditures for both the
general government and the board of
education budgets. However, the target
shall not be binding with respect to
budget submittals. So, that's the extent
of the language regarding this meeting.
So, what I would think we probably want
to do is um couple of things. one kind
of lay out a preliminary
um or work out a preliminary
schedule, you know, first of medals,
etc., you know, as we've kind of done in
the past, although not quite this early
typically. Um and then um the goals and
objectives might be, you know,
the the objectives to keep the keep the
budget as low as possible. Uh but you
know we as a board can recommend that
you know we you know recommend that we
keep it no more than a you know two to
3% increase or you know push a number on
there what you want flat you know reduce
the budget whatever you know we as a
board want to recommend. Um, I think
it'll be a little tough for us to,
you know, well, maybe it's not tough,
but I think that I don't think it would
be a bad idea for us to say, you know, I
think we should target no more than x%
increase in any area any, you know, if
you do this, then you need to come up
with very strong justification as to why
that would be.
>> And we did hold a meeting. We did have a
trio board meeting. Obviously, it was
after the fact last year because all of
this came into play. So this is the very
first year we can go so early and follow
the timeline. Um so we have precedent of
trying to have this meeting last year
with the goals and all of that. Um
yeah
>> I think the goals of the other tri board
meeting have been more about
communication and interaction. How do we
work together?
>> I think this one is
>> definitely still needed I guess.
>> Yeah. So,
>> so this one's specific, but um I do if
since we're talking about it and then
setting the date, I mean I think there's
been a lot of confusion with different
people sending out emails and I applaud
Liz for taking this on and you know
gathering all the information
um and you know trying to pull the
boards and it's unfortunate that when
someone does that you don't always get a
lot of response but I've had that
history too as far as sending out
multiple emails and you know there's
still some board members that I still
haven't even received one response back
from. But most people hopefully did get
back to her. But my point being I think
this email of putting this together
should come from either the board chair
or the vice chair um just to avoid
confusion. You guys can all talk to that
if you don't agree.
>> Yeah, I think you're probably right. I
mean it is a formally required. getting
a little bit confusing for people within
town getting all kinds of emails from
different people or different
organizations. I don't mind saying this
in the you know it's it's nothing
against a you know no one wants more
work to do but I'd be happy to send out
the email once the date is selected. I
think it probably needs to be more than
an email. Actually, thinking about it,
it probably makes sense for it to be a
formal letter as we've done in the past
for certain things and then,
>> you know, we just send it to the
chairman of the board of ed and chairman
of the board of select men and copy
everybody
>> or Yeah.
>> Yeah. I agree. I just think it I mean
there's a reason people whatever happens
in the future is fine, but I think
>> Yeah.
>> got to kind of rein that in a little
bit. I know it's going to be talking
about it later. Everybody's welcome to
send out everything, but as you know,
we're going to be just
>> Yeah, I I think I think this is a formal
communication, so I would I think that
that does make sense that we would have
it. Uh
>> we're following a charter rule. So,
>> yeah.
>> Yeah.
>> Um
>> Kim,
>> I just Liz, I want to say thank you to
you for sending that out and trying to
get the group together. Um,
can we appoint a moderator for the
meeting? I think last time it was, was
it Jed?
>> Jed Larson.
>> And then
I think that it's ideal that we have
this meeting in person,
possibly offer a virtual link, Eric, if
someone requests it, just so that
they're not excluded.
Um,
that's just my personal opinion, but I
do want to say thank you, Liz, for
trying to get this large group of people
together
>> and I I like the idea.
>> People don't always respond to you, Liz,
with the work you put in.
>> It's okay.
>> Well, it's not if you're elected by the
town and you're on a board,
>> you need to respond to things if you
know.
>> Yeah,
>> that's I but
>> but thank you for your efforts, too. I
appreciated seeing it. I knew it was
coming up quickly
>> and and I agree. I like the idea of
doing it in person with the option for
whoever
>> can't make it in person.
>> Um, so that would mean the options would
be what, Eric? Either the grammar school
or would would the senior center be able
to accommodate something like that? Is
it set up for that or not yet?
>> Um, it could. We could simply move the
the owl projector over to
the community center or we could do the
community room now that the sound
attenuation panels are in. That works
okay for hybrid meeting. Certainly
better because the acoustics are better
in the room.
>> It's not great, but it's not bad.
>> The community room or the community
center? room.
>> Um, I would
>> probably go for the community room. Um,
but you, if you decided you wanted to do
the community center, you could set that
up for it.
It's the same equipment in either room
and they both have the sound attenuation
panels. It's just normally that stuff
stays set up in the community room, not
the community center.
I feel like the table setup, like Bill
said, worked out great the year we had
it in the community room. It just seems
like the space accommodates a bigger
square around. But
>> yeah, and I I don't expect we're going
to have really any public participation
to speak of. So, I don't think the
capacity is going to be a big issue for
something like this.
>> Just a guess.
>> Yeah.
>> And we don't have to decide tonight,
honestly. We can we can plan for that
and then if something comes up we can we
can change as long as we post it.
>> Yeah, good idea.
>> Y
>> but I but I do think we want to make a
motion to hold it that date 7 o'clock.
It was a proposed
in-person meeting. You know this is I
think implication is that this is a
board of finance uh it is
>> a le meeting. Um, so you know, if we
wanted to hire a mo or hire select a
moderator, we could, but you know, my
advice would just be to keep it simple
and have the board run it like we do our
normal meetings. We'll post an agenda
and, uh, and try to, you know, go
through it in that way. Uh, most of it
was going to be open discussion.
Um, you know, with, you know,
potentially some proposed dates. Um,
Eric, maybe that's something that you
could come up with if if you have the
time. If you don't, fine. You know, we
can we can take a look at something to
to do that. Um
but uh you know we come up with some
proposed dates for for the budget
schedule and uh see if we can get
agreement on that date and then if the
board of finance has a particular target
budget amount for uh for the budgets
this year then we can you know make that
known.
Bill,
>> uh, just going back to the tri board
meeting, uh, we we had it last year with
with Jed as someone pointed out with
these particular boards that are going,
I think there's a need for a moderator
in my opinion so that you have, you
know, where there's discussions, but he
kept things on track and kept people
from getting too out of control. As you
know, there was there's a lot of
still some animosity between the town,
the board of ed, the this board, that
board. Just in my opinion, it worked out
nice having a moderator last year. I
don't know how well that meeting would
go without someone reigning it in. But
I'll leave that to everybody else's
decision, but I was there and I just I
really
>> I agree, Bill.
>> I was there, too.
>> Uh I I just think without some control
things could get kind of wild.
But I also I agree with you.
>> No, I agree with you, Bill. Oh, uh I was
there as well.
>> Yeah.
>> But I also don't want somebody there to
shut down somebody's
speech, you know what I mean? And I know
Jeb was great and no, he was he was very
good. Um
>> that's shut down speech. I don't think
any moderator would do that. admirer
just make sure that everybody kind of
sticks to the rules, doesn't hog the
meeting, doesn't shut some nobody shuts
somebody else down by overtalking them.
It's everybody gets to say their piece.
That's I think the beauty of a
moderator. But that's all sand.
>> Yeah. No, I don't disagree.
>> The beauty of a good moderator or
somebody there needs to be a firm hand
in this meeting and I think the meeting
it's targeted. It has a very specific
agenda. I do not think we should stray
from that agenda. Um, you know, as much
as we may need more interaction and
discussion between the boards, I think
that this one has a very specific
purpose and should be, you know, we
should stay laser focused on that
purpose. Um, so from that perspective,
um, you know, I I
I'm okay either way. If if the if you
guys think that it works better with a
with a moderator, I'm okay with that. If
you think it's, you know, we just want
to run it ourselves, I'm okay doing that
either. I don't have a problem running
the meeting and you know hurting the
cats as you will um you know as chair
but I'm also totally okay with uh
deciding that it would be more
uh productive to have a uh to have an an
independent moderator. We could
certainly do that.
>> You won't break my heart.
It's going to be the first one that
we've had and having the specific
agenda. He really did just kind of honor
the agenda, I think, and move it along.
And he would only
>> interrupt when needed be when there were
a few people that do tend to, you know,
take it over and, you know, so I'm on
the fence, too. I would hope and I that
people can be mature and this like you
said is a very specific budget related
tri board meeting with us. Yeah. But
there's been a lot of stuff going on
still and recently like Bill said. So
we're hitting the time when it's still
all flowing. So possibly Jed would be a
great person to just invite and have him
and Mark you could I I don't know. Yeah.
I just I want it to stay on track and
just do the specific purpose that it's
supposed to do.
>> Yeah, I think we should insist on that.
>> Yeah.
>> So, somebody want to make a motion?
I'll make a motion to set the date for
the meeting, October 15th at 700 p.m. to
be held at the town community center
with the option of adding um video.
>> Community center or community room?
>> Community room. I thought we were doing
community.
>> I'm sorry. Community room.
>> At the town hall. Second
>> at the town hall.
>> Okay. So, Liz makes a motion. Rob
seconds. Uh further discussion.
All those in favor say I.
>> I.
>> Any opposed?
>> Any abstensions? Hearing none. I think
we're good. Okay. Well, getting back to
this. Um
we will not have an opportunity to meet
before that. Do we want to set some type
of target increase percentage that you
know we we would advise the boards not
to uh exceed?
>> Yeah, that was my next question because
I was just going to say that we're not
going to meet again. How do we
>> think we would have to do it now?
>> Got to do it now.
>> We get out of that conversation now.
>> You know, we don't have to. um we can
simply say, you know, you better keep
any increases low or non-existent,
which is kind of how I personally feel
about it, but you know, um and and leave
it in general terms. Or we could say,
you know,
you need to keep it at or below the you
know, the rate of uh inflation. I mean,
we all know that.
>> I was just thinking inflation, but
>> well, there are contracts and I don't
know how the contracts affect things. we
would have to look at that. Um, but you
know, certainly that's, you know, from
the standpoint of the taxpayers
unless we have a really good reason. I
don't see any reason we should be doing
that much more. But, you know, there may
be projects, there may be specifics that
need to get brought in into the budget
and that's fine. Like said, this is just
advisory on our part.
>> Yeah.
>> If we choose to do it, we don't have to.
>> Probably always a smart idea to
ask people to come in, you know, as low
as they can, but I think I thought this
meeting was for them to tell us their
projects or their thoughts. So, I'd have
to look back at the format and what the
charter said. Um, clearly
others that I thought might speak up at
this point aren't, but, you know, I I
think it's always a smart idea to
hopefully keep,
you know, budgets as low as you can. the
town can only absorb so much and that's
just a suggestion you know people are
going to come in but that's my thought
on it since you asked Mark
>> I agree I agree it should be as but but
what I think is as low as you can is not
going to be the same thing that another
department is going to
their low is not going to be my low you
know what I mean
>> right
>> um
so I kind of like the target idea
But
>> well, setting a target, Liz, kind of
gives you the opportunity when we're
going through the budgets to be able to
say, "Okay, this is where everybody came
in. This people tried to stay in those
limits. These people seem to be way out
here." You know, it kind of gives you
something to look at each budget and
say, "We asked people to do 1.5 or or,
you know, whatever." Smart.
>> And it helps you to look at each one of
those budgets as they come in. having a
a number in there. You could just go in
and say flat, whatever you wanted to do,
but it's nice to have some kind of
>> I'm happy to see a target. I'm happy to
like let's call it a number. Let's say
we want to see our budget no more than
1.5% increase next year.
>> Yep.
>> I'd vote for that.
>> Yeah, I would too.
>> Like I mean, do
>> you want to make a motion that the board
propose that as their target increase
amount?
Chairman,
>> I'll make a motion that we ask for the
budgets to come in at no higher than
1.5%
>> increase.
>> Correct.
>> I second that.
>> Okay. So, just for discussion, do we
have uh any more discussion on that? I
mean, it's an aggressive target. It may
not, you know, it's gonna it may be
challenging in some areas, but I think
we
>> we did okay with the budget last year.
>> Yeah, it's a target, right? It's it's
just a target.
>> It's a target. They if if for some
reason it's not possible, um the reasons
are presented to us and
>> Right.
>> Yep. And then we talk about it.
>> Yep.
>> Yeah. That's smart.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay.
>> Any other comments?
All those in favor say I.
>> I. Any opposed?
Any abstensions?
Okay. Hearing none.
>> So I I don't think we need to
necessarily communicate that in advance.
Obviously, this is a public meeting, so
it'll be out there. U but what we'll do
is uh I'll write a letter just informing
the uh uh the board of Sacramento and
the board of education of the date and
time for the meeting and location. Um,
I'll I'll send this all to you to take a
look at in advance and just state that
the general object I'll just restate the
um charter language and just say that
our our our you know objectives for the
meeting are to have an overall
discussion of the budget process. uh
propose uh a a calendar of events so
that uh people have a general idea what
the schedule should be and uh come to
some agreement about uh about the
process um and the board of finance may
suggest that you know the target but we
don't necessarily need to state that in
the letter we can discuss it when we get
there.
>> That sound okay?
>> Thank you.
>> Fair.
>> Perfect.
>> Eric, very fair. I was just going to say
too, one thing that I'm not empowered to
do as an administrator, but my fellow
town managers do every year with RAM.
Um, and I brought this up with the board
of finance to see whether you wanted to
do it in previous years is do the same
thing with the RAM board of ed and give
them a target and say, "Hey, tough
fiscal times. We would really like to
see you guys bring the RAM budget in at
X, you know, no more than X increase.
Um,
you know, uh, Andy Tyranny used to ask
me pretty much every year to go in on
that with him and Malber's first
selectment on sending that to him. And I
always said, I'm technically an
administrator. I don't have the legal
authority to because I don't, you know,
um, I'm not a town manager. So, but that
is something you could consider.
>> Yeah, good point. Yeah, you have brought
that up before.
>> Yep.
>> So, separate task worth keeping in mind.
>> Be proactive. Absolutely.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Put it out there.
>> You really have nothing to lose by doing
that, right? So,
>> Exactly. Exactly.
>> How do we How do we go about doing that?
Well, I think that uh I think that
that's basically the same thing we just
did, you know, that we we proposed that
uh you know, we agree on a a target
amount uh that we recommend the RAM
budget board of ed come in with their as
their budget increase and uh then we
draft a letter and send it to them. You
know, it's non-binding. Of course, all
this is non-binding, but it's just so we
have agreement as a board formally
>> start. Yeah,
>> we could do it now. Um, we could do it,
you know, we could wait until we have a
new board convened after the elections.
It's probably I don't know if it's early
enough in their their process or not. I
don't know enough about the RAM process,
budgeting process. Um,
we do in next month's meeting too, you
know.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. one of
>> I think it's the kind of thing you want
to convey, you know, and and if their
board membership changes after the
election, you really want that to go to
the new board members, too.
>> I don't know that that's who's up for
the election then, what the terms are,
but um you really want that to kind of
hit as they're beginning the budget
process um and not too late into it or
too early, you know.
So, but I like that idea, Eric. It's a
good point. you brought it up before and
I think it's appropriate and it follows
from what we're talking about here. So,
>> Yep.
>> Yeah.
>> My view.
>> Yeah. So, we can we can put that on the
agenda for next meeting or the meeting
in in November and then, you know, make
sure that gets done. So, I don't think
you want to wait much later than
November.
>> Definitely by October because I think
they're pretty early in their process
too. You know, they do their budgets,
don't you? I don't I feel like it comes
out a little bit sooner.
>> Yeah.
>> So,
>> well, we can propose it now. Uh, Eric,
when did when did the tyranny typically
do that or do you know when that used to
be
>> I think they used to do that more like
January December January time frame like
before
Ram has really so that after the the
uh
after the superintendent presents his
budget but before the board of ed really
starts
>> starts the discussions
And I think sometime like I know the old
business manager for AES
um used to encourage her used to
encourage the board of selectman to give
her a target to shoot from early because
when you're building your budgets you
just figure out what programs you can
actually take on and you can't. Um so um
I don't know how the current
administration will receive that but in
previous years that's something very
similar was done.
>> Hey uh Eric I'm just sitting here
thinking that might the 15th that
community room might be the next zoning
board of appeals meeting.
>> Well then you guys are bumped.
>> We're bumped. So we got to get another
room. I'll I'll talk to Wayne uh see if
we can get a different date, different
location. Um because I'll skip that and
see if I can get a quorum without me at
the ZBA to make this. Obviously, we'll
have to get another room. So,
>> October 15th, it's zoning board of
appeals 7 to 8:00 p.m. Economic
Development Committee 7 to 8:00 p.m. Do
you meet in person then? Typically,
Bill,
>> we meet in person. Yeah.
>> Yeah.
>> Because people like to come and present,
you know, their plans and all sort of
thing. So, I'll ask Wayne if we can
either make it a different date or
different location and I'll see if I can
get people enough people to fill in
without me and have them elect a
chairman because I'm the chairman of
that board. Have them elect a chairman
that night to run the meeting or move
the meeting alto together one way or
another, but I'll work in that.
>> Okay. Thanks.
>> Uh so, back to the RAM discussion
recommendation. And I know it's not even
really on our business tonight, so we,
you know, we really probably should put
it on the agenda for another another
night since it's not on our agenda.
>> Yeah.
>> And we didn't technically change it. Um,
we probably should put that on October's
meeting agenda.
>> I'm fine.
>> Or or November, you know, if we want to
have it a little closer and issue that
in December once the budget uh process
really starts. I personally think it
would make it would be more effective in
November, December, you know, and also
make sure that you're capturing any
changes in the composition of the board
of ed for RAM.
>> Yeah,
>> sounds good.
>> So, last question on that vein is what
do you want from me for this meeting? Is
there any particular I said I'll get you
the the grant stuff, the project stuff.
um you know and the the capital stuff.
Is there anything particular you want
from me other than that
>> for the tri board meeting?
>> Correct.
>> Um just the calendar kind of a proposed
calendar or schedule of events. That
would be it's the only thing I can think
of that we would need from you, Eric.
>> Okay. I'll try to get that to you, Mark,
at least say 10 days ahead and you can
look at it and give me feedback on that.
>> Okay.
>> Prior to the meeting because that that
might be smart for you as a board to
just present that to the other boards
and say, "Here's the schedule. Here's
what we want."
>> Yeah. Yeah. You know, it's generally you
put together a pretty reasonable
schedule and people don't seem to have
an issue with it. So, I mean, some of
it's mandated by the charter anyway.
>> Correct. We agree that we were or we're
not having a moderator.
>> The motion said that we had the option
to choose a moderator, so it left it
open.
>> Oh, okay. I just wasn't sure if Eric or
somebody had to, you know, schedule a
moderator to be there. I I just was
wondering
to Oh, go ahead. Yeah, I was just going
to say if you decide you want a
moderator, I would ask Jed because I
think he's been an effective moderator
the last couple of years if if you want
to go that way, but that's that's up to
you. Um, in the last question, I know
you guys have talked
um,
you know, to to some extent you as a
board of finance get to decide what the
budget looks like. Um, you know, if if
you have specific things you want to see
in the budget, um, I think you should
put that out to everybody there, myself
included. Um, because I'll make our
budget adapt to whatever it is that
whatever format it is you want. You
know, you just have to let us know.
>> Yeah. Personally, I think people are
just used to a specific format. So, if
we deviate too much from it, I think it
becomes confusing. But certainly open to
enter entertain anybody's input if they
want to see things differently.
>> Yeah. The only thing the only concern I
have is uh that the charter specifies
what the budget should look like. It
specifies how many
>> for the town meeting. Yeah.
>> So,
um I mean for the town meeting, wouldn't
we want to just have it set up like that
from the get-go or or what do you think?
like do we want to
>> dive into what that should look like
now?
>> But I think I think you generally have
that, don't you, Eric? Or not always. I
guess we haven't always had
>> something about five columns and I've
never seen anything with five columns.
>> Yeah. The
the problem is is that in some ways it
doesn't actually provide you any
information because one of those is a
projection of the current year. you
know, in December if you're projecting,
you know, the current year, you really
don't know what your final expenditures
are,
you know, and then it's also the
spending to date on that. But unless
somebody really knows for every single
column how much should be expended in
what calendar by what date, I've never
seen that as information the public
could really get anything out of. Um, so
we tried to get close to the the uh the
charter required one last year. Um, but
you know, we can produce it. It just
it's when we've done that in the past,
it's been it's caused more confusion,
not less confusion.
Um but
>> and truthfully I just need to for the
record state by us moving everything so
forward it's it's a little difficult
because we we have to make all these
choices so quickly you know I was never
a fan of moving it earlier you know
because we've got to decide what do we
want to see what do we want to ask you
Eric have just stated that we don't have
the information which is right we're not
going to know not too much is expended
so are to to make realistic assumptions
for the next years. So, I just want to
state that for the record. It's hard
moving everything forward. I was a real
fan of the timeline we had in the past
because we had a little more
information, but I'm not going to
prolong it. We're we have this new
charter. We have to stick by the having
the meeting going with what they want.
So,
>> one thing I I do think though that I
think uh we we probably should decide
whether we want a moderator or not.
>> Let's not leave that hanging
>> because when are we going to when are we
going to decide?
>> I would like to have him simply because
of the the way the town is right now.
Like,
>> do you want to make a motion to that
effect?
>> Yep.
I make a motion that we ask the town
administrator to invite a moderator to
the tri board budget meeting just to
keep us on track.
>> I'll second it.
>> Okay. Further discussion.
>> Do we need to specify the moderator?
>> I can add.
>> I mean, we know we just had the
discussion that, you know, he was going
to ask
>> Jed. Well, if Jed's not available, we'll
have to decide on somebody else. So,
>> right. I mean, I want him to have that
flexibility in case he has to get it
back, but we're obviously
>> So, we'll just say Eric will get a
moderator for the meeting and he knows
you prefer Jed.
>> That's fine.
>> Okay.
>> I thought about throwing that in there,
but I didn't know if I could. I just had
>> Leave it open and we'll make
>> So, yeah.
>> All those in favor?
>> I I
>> I.
>> Any opposed? Any abstensions?
No. Motion passes. Thank you.
>> All right. So, moderated 700 p.m. in
person unless you can't. We'll have the
hybrid capability at the town hall
October 15th.
>> Yes.
>> Y
>> good to go.
>> I should be there.
>> Okay. Good.
>> Good, Rob.
>> All right. Anything else on the tri
board planning meeting, budget meeting?
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. Hearing nothing. We'll move it on.
Again, thank you, Liz, for putting up
putting it together. Uh, next item is
the approval of the meeting minutes from
August 27th.
Anybody wants to make a motion to
approve?
>> Motion to approve the August 27th, 25
regular board of finance meeting minutes
as presented.
>> Okay, second.
>> Bill seconds. Any discussion?
>> Just want to mention it was a nice short
meeting.
>> Nice.
>> That's my Mark wasn't there.
I'm the denominator. I guess there
>> Eric wasn't there.
>> No, Joanne was running and kept going.
>> Do we have any discussion relevant to
the motion at hand?
>> Well, sorry.
>> That was relevant.
>> No. All those in favor say I.
>> I.
>> Any opposed?
And I will abstain since I was not at
the meeting. So, the motion passes.
Thank you.
Okay. We have agenda item eight, which
is board open discussion. So, a couple
things. I sent uh you all an email
earlier today. Um passed on some
information. We got a request from the
chairman of the board of ed that uh we
not have people individually just
contacting Fuss and O'Neal. I guess it
was confusing or problematic for them.
Um uh I guess asking about the uh
>> bathroom
>> the bathroom project at the elementary
school. Um so um as I stated I think
that the biggest concern here is that
there just is a lot of there's not a lot
of information out there and the board
of ed and or the board of selectman and
the board of finance really has not been
part of the process. So uh hence there
was confusion or you know
concern on the part I think members of
both boards to to get the information
and understand what they're doing and
figure out what the heck is going on.
And uh as Kayn said she'll she said they
would get it to us as soon as uh they
have it. They don't have anything yet.
So um to me it's just kind of a black
box. I'm just hearing a lot of rumors. I
don't other than you know seeing some of
the stuff in the minutes of the board of
selection meeting I didn't know anything
was going on with it either. So um I I
don't think that that's going to be a
topic for discussion for uh this tri
board meeting. We should endeavor to
keep that out but it is something we
have to address in terms of what the
process is. So
>> Mark can I ask just a procedure question
when there's an RFP just because that's
not my expertise. So, say there's an
RFP. We've everybody's already approved
Fuss and O'Neal as this. I mean, it's
gone before the boards,
you know, with hiring them to handle the
RFB and the bid process to get the bids
in. So, is it even appropriate? Aren't
we supposed to wait procedurally until
something's selected and then it will be
given to us? I mean, I just want to know
if it's even appropriate that we and I'm
not condoning or, you know, people are
just trying to get some information. I'm
not saying anybody did the wrong thing,
but is that even a thing that we're
allowed to do or are per, you know, or
do we
>> Well, it depends, I guess, on what the
on what's been done. I mean, I think I
think if you're if you're,
you know, some of this is not super
clear in the charter, uh, granted,
right? But I think that if you're
embarking on a capital expenditure
project, then it would behoove you to
keep all of the uh people in the loop
who are going to have to approve that
project. And that's really the CIP.
That's the board of selectmen and the
board of finance. So it would make sense
to have included people in there. Now,
apparently there's a committee and I
don't know what, you know, what they
signed up for, who's on the committee,
what they've asked
>> Bus and O'Neal to do, what the scope of
the project is that they've been given.
So, there really isn't anything yet. So,
you know, I I think it's appropriate to
ask that we have been kind of kept in
the loop. So, that's that's kind of
where I am. Go ahead, Rob. Yeah, I just
my understanding of the status of things
is they just weren't ready to bring it
to CIP or Board of Finance yet. Um they,
you know, FA O'Neal is still working it
up. So, they kind of felt like we don't
have what you want want us to to bring
you yet. When we have it, we'll bring it
to you. But I think it's fair point to
make to them to to say that, you know,
we are um anxiously awaiting that.
>> Yeah, it seems fair.
>> I just want to know procedure. I don't
understand that whole thing. Yeah. Thank
you.
So my concern is I've listened to the
past several meetings and I know they
formed a subcom committee and I know you
and Bill you were named in the
subcommittee. So I'm anxious to hear
what you have to say but in the meeting
that I saw from I think June they said
yep we'll have a subcommittee and we
will post the invitations to those
meetings so that people can be informed
as what's going on. Well, I've scoured
their website and I haven't seen
anything.
>> And then they have reported in their
last board of ed meeting that they have
the contractors lined up and they named
them all. And I felt that it was really
inappropriate
to do that without having any public
meeting to keep the public aware of the
project. You know, where we were in the
project, what the scope of the project.
To me, it just
it just seemed like, wow, they're just
running through with this project and
they've they've got their contractors
and nobody knows anything. So, um I
think that stirred a lot of concern in
in a lot of people. And there was also
some conversation at the last
selectman's meeting that RFPs had been
posted both on the board of education
website and the town of Andover website
>> had not been
>> that that they were posted but they were
not there was nothing but
>> they were not
>> but if if everyone saw the email that I
sent I sent it directly to the person
because I relistened to that. I agree
with you. I was on that meeting too. Um,
I know that Eric was asked a lot of
questions about the RFP or the project
and he didn't really I I tried to see
it. You didn't offer too much, Eric. I
don't know if you were at those
committee meetings and we'll listen to
Bill, too. So, I went straight to Val
and I asked her if she had posted the
RFP cuz I wanted to know because of what
Kim just said. And she said she did send
me an email saying that she requested
that it got posted. So, I don't know why
that didn't happen. So, she sent us an
email asking the town to post it, but
they didn't. I don't know why it's not
on the board of ed website. I'm not
saying that's just an RFP for a bid.
Like I said,
>> she also she also said she was going to
have it posted at the school as well.
>> Right. And all kind of a
>> Right.
>> Right. That would all be kind of like as
a side because they're hiring someone to
actually do the RFP project. Right,
Eric? that that's like an official thing
that goes through the state of
Connecticut, right?
Am I understanding that right?
>> I don't know what their process is
um exactly. So, she sent me a blurb to
put on the town's website that basically
says Fuss and O'Neal is doing anything.
If you want information, call Fuss and
O'Neal. That's not an RFP. An RFP is the
document outlining what the the doc the
RFP is the RFP. If I had had that, I
would have posted that.
>> Yeah. And this isn't we're just trying
to learn. This isn't we're just trying
to get information like Liz. I don't
understand an RFP process. That's not my
expertise. Right. She said that she sent
an email to I guess Jeff Murray who's on
the board of selectmen, too.
Unfortunately, he wasn't at that meeting
and probably could have cleared up some
of the questions that were asked. Um,
yeah. So, it said that there's a
subcommittee. You're right. We all do
need to know information. So, I'm asking
Eric, Eric, say there's a town RFP. And
I know bids are sealed. Working in a
school system, bids come into the school
system all the time. They're sealed.
They have to be opened. I mean, we're
not privy to that until
there's final information. I just want
to know the procedure. So, you know,
we're keeping things where we shouldn't.
Yeah.
>> I can't speak to the school's procedure.
>> No, no. I asked your procedure like you
had an RFP, you're ready to open your
sealed bids. What would you do?
>> Right. So when we have an RFP and it
there are sometimes if it's a state or
federally funded project there are
additional requirements put in it by
that those agencies but ordinarily
sealed bids come into the town clerk's
office they are datestamped and signed
by the town clerk or the assistant town
clerk saying this was received by
because we have a no later than date on
all the RFPs. The RFP is posted on the
town website. Um, usually they're
published in depending on what it is.
Um, we can if it's a smaller RFP, we
might get away with posting it locally
in the papers. We tend to send them to
all the contractors that we know that
would do work like that. Um for the like
for instance the bigger stuff the
federal bridge programs we are required
to send them submit the uh notice of RFP
to two newspapers with statewide
circulation.
So we do that. Um the RFP is on the
town's website. If it's something that
involves a really large plan set like a
bridge, you know, where you've got a 100
plus pages, PDF pages of bridge design,
then we use a hosting service for the
FTP
uh and also for the hard copies because
the town doesn't want to get into going
at running action blueprints and running
copies for people, you know. So, we just
use we use an outside service for that,
but the RFP itself is listed on the town
site. And if you want to look, there's
an RFP up right now for construction
services.
>> Um, that's on the town website. That's
>> when you once you open them just to not
ask you know keep every once you open
them then is it someone's right to
before you've chosen or whatever you
have your committee is it right to ask
for the public to see every bid that's
out there
>> seems like that's not public yet but I
could be wrong that's that's all I'm
trying to see is what we're allowed to
see
>> yeah as as soon as it's open it's
publicly available bids are open. It's
publicly available. Most of our bids for
either services or major construction
projects. A lot of the contractors will
have a a representative there. Um, and
when you open the bids, you read off the
actual bid price and all the pertinent.
And if it's a federal local bridge
program or something with federal or
state dollars, um DOT will also often
have an observer there. Um you know, or
multiple observers there depending on
what it is. Um and you like for instance
with the bridge project, we had to
reject a number of uh applicants because
they didn't supply all the proper
documentation in the original bid. Yeah,
>> we can be a little more flexible if it's
a town only bid and just go back and
say, "Hey buddy, you left out this and
this." Um, but with with state bids,
it's very, you know, programmatic and
>> he didn't supply the information on
electronic media that is automatically
rejected. That kind of thing.
>> It's somebody who spent many, many late
nights putting together multi-million
dollar bids for state contracts. I now
have a flashback. Thank you, Eric.
No, thank you for that.
>> Right. Sometimes the sometimes the price
is actually a separate proposal. So
sometimes they'll give you a technical
proposal and they'll do the price as a
separate proposal and they'll open the
technical proposal that becomes this
public document except where it's
redacted as confidential by the by the
contractor which they can do that. It's
not always allowed but they can they can
they can you know proprietary
information they can they can redact uh
as as confidential. Uh and then the
price is kind of held separately so that
you can negotiate with the with the
supplier without it, you know, being a
public record. So yeah, it it can be
very complicated or as Eric said, if
it's a town only, we could probably make
it a little straightforward. We've kind
of gone back and forth on whether we
want to even, you know, do bids type
things. Does it need to be sealed? Does
it not need to be sealed? It's,
>> you know, it always adds a layer of
bureaucracy and we don't have a lot of
resources. So we have to be a little
>> judicious in how we do those kind
things, I think. So
>> yeah. No, thank you for that overview.
Just to so it sounds like they've
already opened and according to what I'm
seeing. Yeah, I just wanted to kind of
know the process to see where they're
at. So,
>> and didn't do it publicly. Didn't do it
publicly for the town's people to be
able to see. So, this is going to be an
interesting year,
>> right? I I mean in in in my case
um
the way I the way we do bids is written
out in your purchasing policy.
>> So you've actually specified kind of how
the town does the bidding process and we
generally follow that.
>> I know
>> you may add additional things to it but
that's but the board of ed technically
you exempted the board of ed from that
requirement. So, um,
>> well, they hired to do the thing.
So, I don't know what that means for the
Go ahead, Rob.
>> No, I was just going to say as regards a
specific purchasing policy, I think the
idea was the board of ed should work up
one uh themselves and it would probably
be good if it comported roughly with
ours, but they had sort of, you know, by
charter they're kind of separate. So, I
think that's why it went that way. As I
understand the project, yeah, I I think
basically the idea here is that nobody
on the board of ed has the expertise
required to really get their arms around
this project. So, they wanted to hire an
expert to run the process.
>> No, makes sense. And that that went
through tons of meetings and got
approved that they didn't have the Go
ahead.
>> I I think I heard my name thrown out
there as being on a subcommittee.
>> Did you know that?
>> No. Did you know that?
>> I have never been in any kind of
meeting. I have never been notified I'm
on this meeting. So, I know nothing.
>> That's so funny.
>> Nice to know that I'm on the
subcommittee when they meet, but I'm not
aware of
>> it. Suggested not a very organized uh
meeting. Maybe they haven't met yet. I I
>> No, but I heard I in in tr because I was
at an event somewhere and I did hear
that they were putting a committee
together and I think I was near Jeff
Murray at the time and he was saying he
was going to be on the committee and
possibly they were going to reach out to
you, Bill. I just But that's good that
you're saying you were never notified. I
did hear your name as being a person.
>> If Jeff Murray's involved, they won't be
inviting me.
>> Okay.
I don't know. I think they were trying
to have a few people in as stakeholders
that would have some information. Again,
I'm far removed from it. That's why you
see me asking questions tonight. I just
listened to the board of selectmen
meeting which went a little ary on that
as they usually do. So, I figured I like
to educate myself on how things are
supposed to go and you know,
>> well, ideally we would have a BOF
liaison on that committee. That'd be
great.
>> That would be great.
>> But we are
>> not saying I wouldn't do it. I'm just
saying,
>> yeah,
>> told me I'm on this board yet. So,
>> if nominated, I will not accept.
>> If elected, I will not serve. No,
>> you know
what we should do, shouldn't do, what
we're allowed to do, what the process
is. So, that's all.
>> Okay. Well, I'm clearly not going to
beat Joann's uh record for short
meetings. Um I also wanted to point out
um you know the the uh other thing I put
in my email is that uh Jeff Maguire had
stated that he was going to uh try to
make
you know exercise his his uh
participation as an exeicio member of
the various boards. Uh so he expected to
participate in the board of ed meetings
and the board of finance meetings going
forward. couldn't do it tonight because
he was traveling California at least for
us. Um and and that's right in the
charter says that the first selectman is
an exopicio member of all boards and
commissions you know period doesn't have
any uh any differentiation or explicit
uh things by that. Um so typically uh
that means that that's somebody who's a
non- voting member but who would
participate in these discussions as any
member would. So just as a heads up for
that more than anything else, you know,
Jeff stated goal is to make sure that
we're all communicating better. Uh which
I think most of us would agree is a
laudable thing. Um
>> we do need to communicate and make sure
we have uh uh as accurate information as
possible. So
>> it's truly really helpful if you think
about it. I mean people should be when
they're on a board, you learn so much by
attending the other meetings. So more
power to him. He doesn't have to rely on
secondhand things. He'll hear it
himself,
>> right? And and we can ask questions of
him
>> that he hasn't,
>> you know, that that we may not be clear
on. So,
>> yeah. Yeah.
>> Good.
>> Um, so the other thing, if if you guys
are okay with that, the other thing I
wanted to just uh throw out there is
that uh next October's board of finance
meeting is the last one before the
election. Um, we will have a different
composition on our board of finance next
uh next November meeting. Um, I think
you probably most of you are aware, but
um, Rob's term is ending, Joannne's term
is ending, and my term is ending. I'm
not running for reelection. So, at least
my position will be turned over. So, in
the event that neither Joanne nor I
won't be obviously elected because I
won't be in there unless, you know,
somebody gets crazy and writes me in,
but I, as I said, I would refuse my
party's nomination anyway, my
unaffiliated party nomination. But what
I wanted to propose is that for the next
meeting we have um nominations and
appoint uh maybe another co-chair or an
acting co-chair or chair um so that in
the event that neither Joanne nor I or I
won't be in there uh if Joanne is not
elected then you will have somebody
nominated to uh chair the meeting in
November because otherwise What's going
to happen is if if that were to happen,
you know, I would guess Joan probably be
elected, but if she's not, then you will
uh not have a chair and you'll be
meeting. So, you'll really need somebody
to lead that meeting uh and guide it.
So, I would propose um when I set up the
meeting, you know, the only thing I
really do as chair is that, you know,
Joanne and I, we get an email from Kate
saying, "Here's the proposed agenda for
your next meeting. Are you guys okay
with that? We'll add things. will remove
other things, but that's really what we
only do as a chair that you guys don't
necessarily do other than some
communications, which we usually just
share with you unless they're routine.
Um, but you do need to have somebody to
run the meeting and you don't want to
you don't want to go into the meeting in
November looking at each other going,
"Okay, what now?" So, I would recommend
that we we nominate and vote on another
co-chair. Um, in the event that that
happens, do that at our October meeting.
>> And obviously it can't be me either.
>> Just Yeah, it would Yeah, it wouldn't
make sense to have it be Rob,
>> right?
>> So,
>> you are running again though, Rob.
>> I am running again. Yes. But, uh, you
know,
>> the alternative would be
>> this is all contingency planning. So,
should probably be, you know, one of one
of the other three. The alternative
would be you could do something like
draw straws or something like that but
you know personally I would just take it
ahead of time and it only needs to be
for one meeting you know just somebody
until you have the new board in place
and then as we had it kind of discusses
our normal process is that we should uh
vote on uh new chair co-chair positions
uh following the elections on a annual
basis. So,
>> right.
>> Thanks for thinking ahead. That's great.
>> And that's a good question. When the new
board is elected, do they take office
right away? I I thought there was a
delay. Or is it in the new year?
>> There isn't really I don't think a
delay. They're supposed to be I can't
remember exactly what the charter says.
It says something like until the new the
new officers are selected and
I don't know posted or something like
that. I don't know what it is. So, I
don't know if technically they need to
be sworn in or not, but you know,
generally once the election takes place,
you know, there's not like an
inauguration day where they start
>> Right. Right. Right.
>> So,
>> yay. Okay. Perfect.
>> Yeah. I mean, I think you just do a town
hall, get sworn in again, right? Or for
the first time, whatever. And um then
you're good to go.
>> Yep.
>> Good point.
>> But that's, you know, it's interesting
how the charter doesn't specify a
handoff date. It's kind of weird.
>> Yeah.
Well, yeah.
>> On the on the website, it tells when the
term ends. And the term ends on November
18th.
>> Yeah. Which is the Tuesday.
>> Um Well, actually, that's two weeks
after two weeks. Not sure why that why
that is.
>> I think that gives I think that gives
two weeks for the person to sign in to
to swear in.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Probably.
>> And we typically have our meeting what
the next the week after.
>> Yeah. meeting our meeting scheduled for
the 19th. So
>> 19th, right? Because we can't do the
week after that because that's
Thanksgiving. Duh.
>> Right. Right.
>> Yeah. So that makes sense actually
because
>> that all that actually all lines up
fine. Yeah.
>> The 18th is the is the term end date.
Yeah. Yeah. So that's two weeks after
election day. So that makes sense that
Yeah. It gives them opportunity for them
to get over and get sworn in
>> between that those two things before
they can conduct business. So
>> yeah, that's clear. You know what I find
really interesting just as kind of a
side note is that the board of
selection, this board of selectman board
all gets reelected in the same year.
>> Isn't that weird?
>> That is very weird. The word is we're
staggered, right?
>> Continuity, right? A little bit of
continuity. Selectment could be a whole
new board overnight.
>> Could be.
>> Right.
>> The way things are going, they may all
bail at this.
>> Yeah. I mean, honestly, I think of where
I honestly think the staggered process
works a lot better.
>> That would be my take on the matter, but
you know, there's there's all sorts of
differences. I mean, we're seven,
they're five, you know, that kind of
stuff. But yes, to do it all at once
like that, you could have wholesale
changeover and lose an awful lot of
knowledge like that.
[Music]
>> Weird way to run a town.
>> Very strange.
>> Look, it used to be worse.
>> Somebody forgot about it and there must
have had their reasons, I hope. But
first knowledge that you gain by being
on it your first I think
>> let's keep that one in mind next time we
do a charter review commission
>> right that's a good thought
>> seriously
>> okay
>> okay so all right so it sounds like you
all appreciate that opport that that uh
that to kind of make that take care of
that business any other board open
discussion
okay hearing none we'll move on to item
nine which is correspondence uh we have
a copy of the RAM contract included.
Eric, I don't know if you have any
comments on that or
>> no, just when they sign a new contract,
they're authorized to give it.
>> And it's the administration. You know,
every school system has multiple
contracts for their union. So, this one,
when I took a look at it, this looks
like their administrators. So, their
principles, assistant principles, the
superintendent would have a different
contract. So, that's what I saw. looked
fairly standard.
>> Okay.
And then the next thing is uh a copy of
the special report from the OLr.
Uh that's the office of legislative
research. I did some train I trained a
bunch of those people how to use Word
Perfect one time. That was you know
>> perfect. Oh my gosh.
>> Wow.
>> Yeah. Right.
>> That still exists.
>> I know.
>> Yeah. as the office of I trained a bunch
of lawyers how to how to better use word
perfect.
>> I worked for a small software company.
We were under contract to the
Connecticut General uh you know and I
was like a project manager and I got
drafted in to do this because I knew a
lot about it. But anyway, funny little
little aside but um here we have uh the
report from the OLr on uh changes that
will uh affecting municipalities and the
laws. Um, Eric, there's a lot of data
here. I certainly didn't read it. Is
there anything you think we need to be
pointed out to?
>> Yeah, I think if you're going to read
anything, read on page eight of the
document the blurb on MS 2.0. Um so
basically this is something that the
comproller
uh took on as a kind of herculean task
which was reform the what's called the
seamers or Connecticut municipal
employee retirement system accounts. As
you know the costs for employees under
that is is incredibly high. um it was a
lot higher. They were able to bring it
down, but the big problem is is that
there is a pretty significant unfunded
pension liability
uh in the Seymour's program. So like for
instance, the town right now contributes
about 15% of an employes salary into the
system. um but only about 5% goes to
that adding to that employees actual
pool of money to get paid out later and
the rest is dealing with all the
unfunded mandates for the employees that
didn't pay in enough in many years
previously. So they're doing what's
called the MS 2.0
which will be a a second plan going
forward. Now, the earliest the town can
enroll people in that is, I think, 20
>> July July 1st, 2027, looks like.
>> Yeah. And they're also doing uh going to
authorize and set up a an alternative
annuity plan um for municipalities that
are not in uh in Semerge currently, but
it would be good if we were able to
transition new employees after 27 into
MS 2.0 0 because the benefits to the
employees are essentially the same and
the cost to the town are considerably
lower. So that is uh I think a good
thing. Um and that speaks to some
hopefully some fairly significant cost
reductions for the cost of benefits for
town employees uh kicking in in a couple
years. doesn't help us now, but you
know, it's at least good that they're
they're doing that. Um, you know, aside
from that, you know, they really don't
know where they're going with funding.
Uh, at the federal level, there was they
did budget for an increase in health
department and health district funding.
Um, which is good because they cut that
for 25 and 26 and then restored it plus
gave extra money in 27. So why they cut
it for two years and then restored it as
a higher level, I don't know, but that's
good for the health districts and that
should lower our costs um as a member of
the health district. Um, you know,
there's the other thing that I think was
good was there OPM had this requirement
that if town budgets increase greater
than 2.5%
or the rate of inflation,
then uh we got less state funds. So, if
you're having trouble keeping your
budget under control, the state's
response is, "Well, we'll give you less
money." Like, that was a good idea. Um,
so we've kept under the the cap. Um, and
we haven't really had a problem with
that historically, but they've lifted
that um, you know, going forward. And
that's just an FYI. Hopefully, we don't
get to the point where we're over the
cap and we would have been eligible for
it anyway. Um so that is uh
uh you know something we have to to deal
with. Um the the other big thing is the
comproller has announced that he really
is a uh
um going to go after
um
significant reform in the way town taxes
the town the the state system for towns
collecting taxes. Nobody knows what
that's going to look like. um he's asked
kind of all the town managers and
administrators and mayors to give them,
you know, their suggestions and they're
going to hopefully see whether they can
come up with something that's an
effective reform for local taxes. Um, in
my head, the biggest single thing that
the state could do is increase its share
of educational funding to the towns
because that is, you know, 2/3 to 3/4 of
our budget. And if you want to make a
noticeable difference in town taxes,
that's the way to do it. Um, so that's
all I want. You can read through this.
There's lots of pages of of data there.
Um, every year they, you know, pass an
enormous number of laws and we all try
to figure out how to accommodate that.
That's it.
>> Yeah. Uh, Rob, you had your hand up
earlier.
>> You know, it's irrelevant because they
rescended the thing anyway. So,
whatever.
>> Let's move on.
>> Anyone else?
>> Okay. Hearing none, we'll move on to
agenda item 10, which is public speak.
Uh, looks like the only member of the
public we have here is Tess. Tess, do
you have anything to add to public
speak?
>> Mark, thank you. No, I'm all set.
>> Okay. Thank you. All right.
I'm impressed by your uh hanging in
there ability, these exciting times. Uh,
next item is adjournment. Would anybody
like to make motion to adjurnn?
>> I will make the motion to adjurnn.
>> Okay. Thank you, Bill. Second. Kimberly,
you had your name up your hand up at
your mut.
>> I'll second it.
>> Okay. Any discussion?
All those in favor say I.
>> I.
>> Any opposed?
>> Were you opposed, Liz? Is that what
you're No, you were saying, right?
>> I'm an I. I'm a
>> Just want to make sure.
>> Beladed eye.
>> A belated eye. There you go.
>> Yes, I'm a bladed eye. We're gonna have
to institute a pitch clock, you know.
So,
>> Motion passes. I slam my virtual gavl.
Thank you everybody. We'll see you in a
couple weeks.
>> Take care.
>> Bye.